# Additions in OG Proverbs 1-9

## **1:7bc**

| text                                                                                                                 | translation |
| -----------                                                                                                          | ----------- |
| `Ἀρχὴ σοφίας φόβος θεοῦ`<br>`σύνεσις δὲ ἀγαθὴ πᾶσι τοῖς ποιοῦσιν αὐτήν`<br>`εὐσέβεια δὲ εἰς θεὸν ἀρχὴ αἰσθέσεως`<br>`σοφίαν δὲ καὶ παιδείαν ἀσεβεῖς ἐξουθενήσουσιν` | The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God,<br>understanding is good to all who practice it,<br>piety toward God is the beginning of sense,<br>wisdom and instruction fools despise |
| `יראת יהוה ראשׁית דעת`<br>`חכמה ומוסר אוילים בזו`  |Fear of YHWH is the beginning of knowledge,<br>wisdom and discipline fools despise |

Greek Proverbs 1:7 is noticeably longer than the MT (4 stichoi versus 2). Line 7a corresponds closely to Hb and should be considered a fairly free translation, with the subject and predicate reversed and the choice of σοφία for דעת. Hb 7b appears quite literally translated in line Greek 7d, which leaves 7bc as apparently extraneous to the parent. Lines 7bc, then, could potentially be free translator additions sandwiched between the original two lines. A difficulty arises in 7c, however, as the stich could reasonably be considered a free translation of Hb 7a (see specifically ἀρχὴ αἰσθέσεως as the semantic path [^1] ). In 7d, ἀσεβεῖς for Hb אוילים would then exemplify the moralizing tendency of the translator throughout OG. [^2] This is not to say that the author of Hb Proverbs considered foolishness a morally neutral category, but the translator typically strengthens and shifts the language to more explicitly moral terms.

	Before more can be said about translation technique, the difficulty of the additional lines must be resolved. Two preliminary options are available: double rendering or assimilation. If taken to be a double translation, this would mark the first of many in the translation as a whole. However, another difficulty arises, namely, that it breaks from the common pattern for doubles in OG Proverbs. Double renderings typically take the form of a bistich where the two lines lie adjacent in the text and where both clearly correspond to a single line in the parent. In the case of Greek 1:7, either the Hebrew in its entirety has be translated twice or Hb 7a alone has been translated twice (OG 7ac) and is separated by an additional stich. In either case, OG 7b stands out as either exegetical provision of context or the translator’s creativity with no clear semantic path from parent to translation. 

	Alternatively, the translator assimilated the text of OG Psalm 110:10 [Hb 111:10] into his translation without a doubling of the usual pattern. [^3] The texts of the Psalm in Greek and Hebrew are presented below:


| text                                                                                                                 | translation |
| -----------                                                                                                          | ----------- |
| ἀρχὴ σοφίας φόβος κυρίου<br>σύνεσις ἀγαθὴ πᾶσι τοῖς ποιοῦσιν αὐτήν<br>ἡ αἴνεσις αὐτοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος | The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord,<br>understanding is good to those who practice it,<br>His praise endures forever.    |
| ראשׁית חכמה יראת יהוה<br>שׂכל טוב לכל עשׂיהם<br>תהלתו עמדת לעד<br>                                                      | The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord,<br>good understanding to all who practice them,<br>His praise endures forever.  |

D’Hamonville remarks that there is both doubling (where 7cd correspond to Hb) and a “borrowing” from Psalm 110 (111) for 7ab, who also views 7a (and 5a) as forming an inclusio of sorts with OG 9:9a and 10a.*1* Doubling, for D’Hamonville, is essentially on the basis of two Hebrew lines reflected by 4 Greek lines.*2* He also rejects the idea that the additional material is Hexaplaric. Cook likewise rejects Hexaplaric origins and believes that the translator “deliberately quotes from the Psalm in order to make a clear statement as to where knowledge and wisdom originate”.*3* Joosten’s comment is the most thorough:

“Dans la LXX, le v. 7 est redoublé...Ce sont les stiques cd qui correspondent au TM, le « addition » ab apparaissant comme un emprunt au Ps 110 (111), 10”. David Marc D’Hamonville, Les Proverbes, La Bible D’Alexandrie 17 (Paris: Cerf, 2000), 160-161.

*2*For an in-depth treatment of double translations, see Zippora Talshir, “Double Translations in the Septuagint”, VI Congress of the International Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies, Jerusalem 1986 (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1987). In it she defines double translations as “cases of one item in the Masoretic Text (MT) being matched with two items in the Septuagint (LXX)” (21), though she concedes that there is space for diverging views. Her definition extends to the entirety of the Greek Old Testament, and as such is broad enough to encompass many different forms of double translations. For Greek Proverbs, her definition is too broad to meaningfully classify actual examples of double renderings. 

*3*Johann Cook, The Septuagint of Proverbs, 61.
```
The additional lines undoubtedly have their origin in the Psalms. The problem is that it is hard to know at what stage the addition was made. It is possible that the translator was the one who borrowed the addition from the Greek version of Psalms. But other scenarios can be imagined as well. The additional lines may have been present already in the Hebrew source text of Prov. 1:7. If so, the Greek translation could be original in Proverbs and borrowed in Psalms. Another possibility is that the additional lines were added into the Greek text of Proverbs secondarily, in the course of scribal transmission.*1*
*1*Jan Joosten, “The Relation of the Septuagint of Proverbs to Psalms”, Septuagint, Sages, and Scripture: Studies in Honour of Johann Cook, Supplements to Vetus Testamentum 172, eds. Randall X. Gauthier, Gideon R. Kotzé, and Gert J. Steyn (Leiden: Brill, 2016). 
```
In other words, tracing the origin of the material is a tricky business indeed.

Regarding a variant Hebrew tradition, the external evidence does not provide enough to support it.*1* Two traditions which have an established dependence on the OG, Peshitta (in Proverbs) and Vetus Latina (all of OG), support the stichic structure in MT:

*1*This fact does not make it an impossible option, but rather a doubtful option. 

| text                                                  | translation                                                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ܪܝܫ ܚܟܡܬܐ ܕܚܠܬܗ ܕܡܪܝܐ<br>ܝܕܥܬܐ ܕܝܢ ܘܡܪܕܘܬܐ ܫܝܛܝܢ ܥܘܠܐ | The beginning of wisdom is fear of the Lord,<br>knowledge and discipline the unjust despise |
|  *Timor Domini, initium sensus,<br>sapientiam autem et disciplinam impii spernunt* | Fear of the Lord is the beginning of understanding,<br>but prudence and discipline the impious despise |

The Vetus Latina is particularly noteworthy, as it is well known that the entire translation was produced from the OG and is lacking the additional lines seen in Greek Proverbs.*1* As well, this translation maintains the Hebrew word order for 7a, and even a better translation equivalent for דעת (sensus). The Peshitta translator in Proverbs does show a marked dependence on the Septuagint, but this is not an exclusive dependence. His base text was in fact a Hebrew text from which he routinely deviates. Syriac ܥܘ̈ܠܐ, “unjust, unrighteous, lawless”, is interesting in this respect, as it is semantically closer to ἀσεβεῖς, “ungodly, unholy, profane”, than it is to אוילים, “foolish; fool, idiot”. On the one hand, this could indicate some influence of the Greek tradition in Peshitta at 1:7, which would be a strong suggestion that he was looking at a Greek text closer to MT than the present text in Rhalfs. On the other hand, of the 4 occurrences of אוילים (pl.) in Proverbs, the Peshitta translator used ܥܘ̈ܠܐ for three of them (1:7, 10:21, and 14:9; the other is 16:22), which makes this a fairly generic rendering for the translator. 

	Additionally, 7a in Peshitta reflects Greek 7a more closely than Hebrew, both in the word order and the choice of lexical equivalents (Syriac ܚܟܡܬܐ and Greek σοφίας). This could indicate that the Hebrew Vorlage of LXX and Peshitta read closer to the text at Psalm 111:10a rather than what is present in MT. Equally as likely, however, is that the translator of LXX appropriated the translation of the passage in the Psalms which was then followed by the translator of Peshitta. Line 7b in Peshitta also lines up closer to Greek 7d than Hebrew 7b. The presence of ܕܝܢ ܘ in 7b matches Greek δὲ καὶ in 7d and allows for the possibility that he did have an eye on the LXX.

	In my view, the Greek text in Rhalfs 1:7bc are corruptions in the transmission of LXX and not original, contra D’Hamonville and Cook. Appendix 1 contains my proposal for a stemma and an explanation of my conclusions. In brief, Greek 7a could be understood in two ways. In the first place, the text in Rhalfs is original to the translator and was included intentionally due to the strong similarity with Greek Psalm 110:10a and his desire to connect these two texts. On the other hand, the Vetus Latina, a daughter version of OG, read with the Hebrew rather than the Greek and initially suggests that 7a was closer to the Hebrew and was assimilated later.*2* In either case, line 7b was mistakenly inserted after 7a, perhaps by a scribe who began to copy from memory or from marginalia that labeled an inter-Septuagintal similarity. Lastly, I view 7c as a legitimate translation of Hb 7a, but one not created by the translator of OG. My tentative proposal is that it is Hexaplaric, maybe from Theodotion.*3* This leaves 7a as possibly OG along with 7d indisputably so. 

	If 7a is original, it reflects a semi-free translation of the Hebrew. Though it was assimilated from Greek Psalm 110:10a, the translator would still have considered it a valid translation of his Hebrew Vorlage. The line in Greek reverses the subject and predicate of the Hebrew, and translates דעת with σοφία, a near but not exact equivalent. The normal rendering for דעת in Greek Proverbs is αἴσθησις, which is present in 7c.*4* His use of θεός for יהוה instead of κύριος is not remarkable, as he tends to alternate between these two words throughout the translation.*5* Line 7b does not reflect a Hebrew base text and did not come from the translator, and as such it requires no further comment.

	Greek εὐσέβεια δὲ εἰς θεὸν in 7c represents a semi-free translation of Hb 7a. Hebrew יראה when used with יהוה implies a type of fear much different than, for example, a fear of thorns (Isa. 7:25). By rendering with εὐσέβεια the translator captured the more reverent, religious form of fear. This type of rendering is consistent with Theodotion and Symmachus. Greek εἰς θεὸν is an epexegetical rendering of יהוה necessitated by εὐσέβεια. If he had rendered the Hebrew construct chain with a noun + genitive construction typical of more literal translations, it would have created an unclear objective/subjective genitive. In the next place, αἴσθησις occurs 20 times in Greek Proverbs, 19 of which reflect דעת in the source, making this an ordinary equivalent.

	Greek 7d reflects a fairly literal translation. Worthy of note, as mentioned above, is the translator’s use of ἀσεβεῖς for אוילים. The typical rendering for אויל is ἄφρων throughout Greek Proverbs, but the translator often recasts the Hebrew in explicitly moral terms, a phenomenon that occurs in other places in chapter 1.*6* Hebrew בזו has a gnomic aspect, “fools (as a general and lasting principle) despise wisdom and discipline.” Though a Greek present or gnomic aorist is more expected, the Greek future ἐξουθενήσουσιν can carry a gnomic or general sense.*7*

*1*“The Old Latin version, as distinct from the later version by Jerome, was translated from the Septuagint”. Ernst Würthwein, The Text of the Old Testament, 2nd Ed. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), 91.

*2*Würthwein explains the unique importance of this version because “it goes back to the period before the Septuagint recensions,” while cautioning on how it is used in textual criticism due to the likelihood of textual plurality in antiquity. Würthwein, The Text of the Old Testament, 91. Tov likewise views the version as very valuable, but explains that “some of its ‘Hebraizing’ elements may have entered the Latin translation directly from a Hebrew source.” Emmanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 3rd ed. (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2012), 134.

*3*Perhaps instead Symmachus. Dines describes Symmachus’ translation as “Faithful to ‘the’ Hebrew, but more natural and even elegant in it Greek style,” and Theodotion as “close to the Hebrew but without doing violence to the Greek.” Jennifer Dines, The Septuagint, Understanding the Bible and its World (New York: T&T Clark, 2005), 84-85, 89.
*4*This fact leads me to believe that 7a originally read αἴσθησις prior to assimilation to Greek Psalm 110:10a. See Edwin Hatch and Henry A. Redpath, A Concordance to the Septuagint and the Other Greek Versions of the Old Testament (Including the Apocryphal Books), vol. I, Α-Ι (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954), 36. 
*5*Rhalfs notes that A reads κυριου.
*6*Cf. also παρανόμων for אוילים at 14:9.
*7*Evert van Emde Boas, Albert Rijksbaron, Luuk Huitink, and Matthieu de Bakker, The Cambridge Grammar of Classical Greek (Cambridge: CUP, 2019), 426.

## **1:18b**

| text                                                                                                                 | translation |
| -----------                                                                                                          | ----------- |
| `αὐτοὶ γὰρ οἱ φόνου μετέχοντες θησαυρίζουσιν ἑαυτοῖς κακά`<br>`ἡ δὲ καταστροφῆ ἀνδρῶν παρανόμων κακή` | For they who have a share in murder are storing up evil for themselves,<br>and the ruin of lawless men is evil. |
| `והם לדמם יארבו`<br>`יצפנו לנפשׁתם`| But they lie in wait for their own blood,<br>they hide for their own lives. |

Greek 1:18 is so freely rendered that the base text is almost unrecognizable. D’Hamonville splits the Greek into three stichoi, but I find this to be forced.*1* A better understanding is that the translator collapsed all of Hb 18 into a single, longer line (18a) and added his own (18b).*2* The closest that the verse gets to literal is αὐτοί for הם. In the first place, Hebrew ו becomes γὰρ in Greek and was added by the translator in keeping with his new literary structure for chapter 1. In Hebrew, verses 16 and 17 both begin with causal כי, and to make the literary link stronger he continued the pattern into verse 18. Greek οἱ φόνου μετέχοντες is a conceptual adaptation of Hebrew 14a intended to parallel נארבה לדם in verse 11. In this case, the translator spins the content of the Hebrew to generate his own new exegetical thrust. The Hebrew text demonstrates the principle of retribution, the actions of the scoundrels soon to be turned upon their own heads. In Greek, retribution is still detectable but in a different way. Rather than reciprocal punishment, the actions of murderers are much more abstractly “storing up evil”. As well, the synonymous parallelism is broken in favor of more prosodic verse.*3*

	Greek μετέχω is used infrequently in the Septuagint (10x). Cooke asserts that it corresponds to ארב, but this is entirely unlikely.*4* Similar to verse 11, the translator omitted any trace of ארב in favor of an epexegetical rendering. In all of Proverbs, he only renders this Hebrew lexeme literally once (7:12), which makes μετέχω = ארב highly suspect. This also leads me to believe that he may not have had a clear understanding of its meaning. θησαυρίζουσιν is an adaptation of יצפנו. I say adaptation because the translator was influenced by the lexeme, but did not render it as it lies in the text. As in verse 11, the translator took צפן transitively. 

	In the next place, he collapsed both לדמם or לנפשׁתם into a single reference, ἑαυτοῖς. This combined rendering stands in stark contrast to the double rendering in verse 14. Greek κακός is used frequently throughout Proverbs (4x in chapter 1, 2x in this verse) and here demonstrates a moral adaptation of the context. In 3 of the 4 occurrences in chapter 1, κακός is a free translator addition, the exception being κακοῦ for רעה in 1:33. The use of the plural in 18a may indicate a multitude of troubles that follow this way of life, whether in series over time or all at once. Interestingly, the most common form of κακός in the Psalms is the neuter plural, which may account for this form here. Cooke notes the similarity of this verse with 16:17 and believes that the translator accounted for this when translating here.*5* The translator demonstrates his familiarity both with other parts of the Greek canon as well as his own book, which makes this a strong possibility.

	Line b is an entirely free addition. De Lagarde notes that this line is missing in the current Hebrew text, but proposes a retroverted Hebrew that may have been the translator’s Vorlage.*6* Cooke again rightly notes the presence of the translator’s characteristic word combinations, ἀνδρῶν παρανόμων, which further shows his commitment to sharp moral distinctions between the righteous and ungodly.*7* Whether this line comes from a lost Hebrew manuscript cannot move beyond conjecture. What is known, however, is the remarkable amount of freedom in 18a. This leads me to believe that 18b is a raw addition created by the translator to complete the bistich present in Hebrew. As shown for verses 10 and 11, the translator was reading stichometrically. The addition here, though entirely free, was included as a contextual adaptation to match the stichometry and intention of the Hebrew text. As well, this line may have been intended to foreshadow 1:27: ἡ δὲ καταστροφὴ ὁμοίως καταιγίδι παρῇ. Greek καταστροφή is used only here and in 1:27 in Proverbs. D’Hamonville believe this to be a case of classical usage based on the meaning “end of life, death”, and connects it to the ruin of Sodom.*8* The word does occurs for the first time in the narrative of Sodom in the LXX, but the evidence he presents is too little to conclude that the meaning is classical. The word is used in this way throughout the LXX, perhaps indicating that the meaning remained consistent from the classical to early Hellenistic period. Moreover, the word could reasonably be understood to mean “ruin” or “overturning” and still make sense in context.

*1*D’Hamonville, Proverbes, 162.
*2*This appears to be Cooke’s understanding as well. Cooke, The Septuagint of Proverbs, 79.
*3*D’Hamonville, Proverbes, 163.
*4*Cooke, The Septuagint of Proverbs, 80. See also Edwin Hatch and Henry A. Redpath, A Concordance to the Septuagint and the Other Greek Versions of the Old Testament (Including the Apocryphal Books), vol. II, Κ-Ω (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), 917. 
*5*ἀνὴρ ἄφρων ὀρύσσει  ἑαυτῷ κακά, ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ χειλέων θησαυρίζει πῦρ. Cooke, The Septuagint of Proverbs, 80. 
*6*His retroverted text is וְאַחֲרִית אַנְשֵׁי עָוֹן בִּישָׁה. De Lagarde, Anmerkungen, 8.
*7*Cooke, The Septuagint of Proverbs, 80. 
*8*D’Hamonville, Proverbes 163. 

## **2:2c**

| text                                                                                                                 | translation |
| -----------                                                                                                          | ----------- |
| `ὑπακούσεται σοφίας τὸ οὖς σου,`<br>`καὶ παραβαλεῖς καρδίαν σου εἰς σύνεσιν,`<br>`παραβαλεῖς δὲ αὐτὴν ἐπὶ νουθέτησιν τῷ υἱῷ σου.` | your ear will be attentive to wisdom<br>and you shall incline your heart to understanding<br>and you shall incline it to the admonition of your son |
| `לְהַקְשִׁ֣יב לַֽחָכְמָ֣ה אָזְנֶ֑ךָ`<br>`תַּטֶּ֥ה לִ֝בְּךָ֗ לַתְּבוּנָֽה׃` | to make your ear attentive to wisdom<br>inclining your heart to understanding |

There are hints of double rendering in 2:2, but it has been anaylyzed here as an addition. Becuase 2c introduces a new idea, namely that wisdom will be imparted to the hearer's son, it is better understood as a translator addition (even if loosely influenced by 2b). Difficulty with this understanding is first encountered in `παραβαλεῖς` repeated in lines b and c. Greek `παραβάλλω` is infrequent in the Old Greek/Septuagint, attested only 10x (6x in Gk. Proverbs, all translating the _Hiphil_ of `נטה`). Two of the six occurences in Proverbs are here in 2:2. This passage is also unique, in that every other occurence of `παραβάλλω` in Greek Proverbs, it takes `οὖς` as the direct object, "incline the ear". These expressions are not semantically all that different from the example in 2:2b: to extend the ear or extend the heart is to offer up one's faculties for understanding to be taught. These examples all match their corresponding Hebrew base text. Line 2c, however, has no corresponding Hebrew base text and the expression is unmatched in Proverbs. In fact, this expression is more consistent with the Classical useage of `παραβάλλω`, "throw beside or by, throw to one, as fodder for horses". [^lsj-entry-for-paraballo]. This usage of `παραβάλλω` is also found in OG in Judges 19:21: `καὶ εἰσήγαγεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ παρέβαλεν τοῖς ὑποζυγίοις αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐνίψαντο τοὺς πόδας αὐτῶν καὶ ἔφαγον καὶ ἔπιον.`. A similar example, though not for livestock, is found in Ruth 2:16: `καὶ βαστάζοντες βαστάξατε αὐτῇ καί γε παραβάλλοντες παραβαλεῖτε αὐτῇ ἐκ τῶν βεβουνισμένων, καὶ ἄφετε καὶ συλλέξει, καὶ οὐκ ἐπιτιμήσετε αὐτῇ`. Example of the Classical lexicon or grammar abound in the first 9 chapters of Greek Proverbs. Whether these are authentic or later additions (from the Classical Renaissance) cannot be determined with surety. D'Hamonville entertains the idea that the third _stichos_ (for verses two and 3; see below) could be doubly rendered: "_il est tentant d'y voir la lecon d'un reviseur, plus litteraliste, mais on ne peut tout a fait exclure un dedoublement originel, emphatique_" (D'Hamonville, 168). He explains that femine `αὐτὴν` refers to `σοφία` or `σύνεσις`, making it much more likely that this verse is original to the translator, not a later addition. D'Hamonville deals only cursorily with double renderings, and, by the working definition in this paper, I would exclude it from that category (see chapter 4). The verse references and shadows material already translated, but is not itself a translation of that material, but a translator addition that serves as an explanator gloss.



> Include examples for Classical imitation in Proverbs.
